SERIALIZATION & DESERIALIZATION

Serialization is the process of flattening a complex, in-memory data structure into a linear stream of bytes or text.
Deserialization is the exact reverse: parsing that linear stream back into a live data structure in memory.
As a backend engineer, you apply this concept every time your server communicates with a database, a cache,
a frontend client, or another microservice.
Here is the complete SDE mastery guide to this concept.


1. The Computer Science Problem (RAM vs. Network)

In your Node.js backend, a JavaScript object lives in Heap Memory. If that object contains an array, the object
doesn’t physically hold the array; it holds a memory pointer (an address) telling the CPU where to find it.
Network cables and hard drives do not understand memory pointers. They can only process a 1D, continuous
stream of bytes.
Serialization traverses your object in RAM, extracts the actual values, and strips away the memory pointers.
It encodes the data into a standardized, self-contained format that can safely travel across the internet.


In-Memory Object (RAM)

user = {
    name: "Kartik",
    age: 21,
    skills: ["JS", "Python"]
}

This is a memory pointer
(address) to the array in Heap.


Linear Stream (Network)

{"name":"Kartik",
"age":21,
"skills":["JS","Python"]}

A 1D, continuous
stream of data (no pointers).


Reconstructed Object (RAM)

user = {
    name: "Kartik",
    age: 21,
    skills: ["JS", "Python"]
}

A new object is created in memory
with new memory addresses.


2. The Universal Translator

Because serialization strips away the host language’s specific memory rules, it acts as a universal translator.
A Node.js backend can serialize a JavaScript object into a JSON text string. That string travels over HTTP
to a completely different server. A Java backend receives the text string, deserializes it, and allocates brand new
memory to turn it into a native Java Object (POJO). Neither language needs to understand how the other works;
they only need to understand the shared serialization format.


Node.js (JavaScript)

Serialize JS Object

        ↓

JSON String

{"name":"Kartik","age":21}

(Travels over HTTP)

        ↓

Java (Backend)

Deserialize to Java Object
(POJO)


3. The Big SDE Decision: JSON vs. Binary

In product-based company interviews, you will be asked to design microservice architectures. The serialization format
you choose drastically impacts system performance.

Feature                  JSON (Text Serialization)                  Protobuf / gRPC (Binary Serialization)

Format                   Text strings ({"name":"Kartik"})             Raw binary (01001011...)

Payload Size              Large (contains structural characters       Very Small (data is tightly packed using TLV
                          like {, ", :))                             encoding)

CPU Cost                  High (Lexical string parsing is slow)       Low (Direct mapping to memory structures)

Readability               Human-readable (easy to debug)              Machine-only (requires a schema to decode)

Best Use Case             Public REST APIs facing web browsers        Internal microservice-to-microservice
                          and mobile apps                              communication.


4. The Security Threat: Insecure Deserialization

This is an OWASP Top 10 security vulnerability. It happens when a backend blindly deserializes data provided by a user
without validating it.
If a backend uses a native serialization tool (like Python’s pickle or Java Serialization), the serialized data stream often
includes instructions on what type of objects to create. A hacker can intercept the stream and modify it to instantiate a
malicious system-level class. When the server deserializes it, it accidentally allocates memory for the hacker’s code and
executes it, leading to Remote Code Execution (RCE).
The Fix: Always use data-only serialization formats like JSON, and validate the schema before processing the data.


How to Answer in an Interview

If an interviewer asks: “Explain the lifecycle of data serialization in a client-server architecture and the trade-offs of the format you choose.”

Your Answer Structure:

1. Define the lifecycle: “When a client sends data, it serializes its in-memory objects into a linear byte stream—typically a JSON string—
   so it can be transmitted over the network. The server receives this HTTP payload and deserializes it, allocating new memory to
   rebuild the object in its native language environment.”

2. Explain the trade-offs: “For public APIs, I use JSON because it is natively supported by all browsers and is highly debuggable.
   However, text-based deserialization is a synchronous, CPU-heavy operation.”

3. Provide the optimization: “If I am designing high-throughput internal microservices, I would swap JSON for a binary serialization
   format like Protocol Buffers. Binary serialization drastically reduces the network payload size and bypasses expensive text parsing,
   allowing the CPU to deserialize the data much faster, which prevents the Node.js event loop from blocking under heavy load.”