THE HTTP OPTIONS METHOD

The OPTIONS method is the HTTP equivalent of calling a restaurant ahead of time and asking, "Do you accept
credit cards, and what are your opening hours?"
Unlike GET or POST, the OPTIONS method never asks for actual data (like a user profile) and never modifies
data (like creating a post). Instead, it asks the server for the rules of engagement regarding a specific URL.
In backend engineering, OPTIONS is used in two primary ways.

1. The CORS Preflight (The Modern Use Case)

As we just discussed, this is the most common reason you will see OPTIONS requests in your browser’s network tab today.
When a frontend tries to make a "complex" cross-origin request (like sending a PUT request with a JSON body),
the browser automatically fires a completely invisible OPTIONS request first to ask for permission.

The Browser’s OPTIONS Request:

HTTP
OPTIONS /api/users/123 HTTP/1.1
Origin: https://my-frontend.com
Access-Control-Request-Method: PUT
Access-Control-Request-Headers: Content-Type, Authorization

(Translation: "I am a frontend at my-frontend.com. I want to send a
PUT request to this URL, and I want to attach Content-Type
and Authorization headers. Are you okay with that?")

The Server’s Reply:

HTTP
HTTP/1.1 204 No Content
Access-Control-Allow-Origin: https://my-frontend.com
Access-Control-Allow-Methods: GET, POST, PUT, DELETE
Access-Control-Allow-Headers: Content-Type, Authorization

(Translation: "Yes, you are on the VIP list. You are allowed
to use those methods and headers. Go ahead and send
your real request.")


2. Discovering Server Capabilities (The Original Use Case)

Before CORS was invented, OPTIONS was created so a client could ask a server, "What am I allowed to do to this specific URL?"
Imagine you are building a generic API testing tool (like Postman). You point it at https://api.example.com/users/123.
You don’t know if that endpoint allows you to delete the user, update the user, or only read the user.
You can send a standard OPTIONS request to that URL. The server will reply with an Allow header detailing exactly
what HTTP methods are supported for that specific resource.

The Server’s Reply:

HTTP
HTTP/1.1 200 OK
Allow: GET, HEAD, PUT

(Translation: "For this specific user ID, you can read their data (GET/HEAD)
or update their data (PUT), but you cannot DELETE them or POST new data here.")


Technical Characteristics of OPTIONS

Interviewers love testing your knowledge of HTTP method categories (Safe and Idempotent).

• It is "Safe": A Safe HTTP method is one that is strictly read-only and does not alter the state of the server.
  (OPTIONS, GET, and HEAD are safe).

• It is "Idempotent": Sending the same OPTIONS request 1 time or 10,000 times yields the exact same result
  and changes nothing on the backend.

• No Body Required: A standard OPTIONS request generally does not contain a payload in the body, and the server’s
  response usually has an empty body as well (often returning a 204 No Content status code).


Understanding CORS (Cross-Origin Resource Sharing)

To understand CORS (Cross-Origin Resource Sharing), you first have to understand the strict security rule that makes it necessary:
the Same-Origin Policy (SOP).
By default, web browsers are incredibly paranoid. If you are logged into your bank at https://bank.com, the browser will flat-out
refuse to let a script running on a different website (like https://sketchy-site.com) make an HTTP request to your bank’s API.
The browser enforces this rule: A frontend can only fetch data from a backend that has the exact same origin (Protocol + Domain + Port).
But in modern web development, your frontend might be hosted on https://my-app.vercel.app and your backend on https://api.my-app.com.
Because the domains are different, the browser blocks the connection by default.
CORS is the mechanism that allows the server to tell the browser: "It’s okay, I recognize this frontend. Let them in."


The Two Types of CORS Requests

When your frontend tries to cross origins, the browser handles it in one of two ways, depending on how complex the request is.

1. Simple Requests

If your frontend makes a basic GET or POST request without any custom headers (like Authorization), the browser just
sends the request immediately.

However, it attaches an Origin header indicating where
the request came from:

Origin: https://my-app.vercel.app

When the server replies, the browser intercepts the response
and checks for a specific security header:

Access-Control-Allow-Origin: https://my-app.vercel.app
(or * to allow anyone).

If that header is missing or doesn’t match, the browser throws
a CORS Error in your console and hides the data from your
JavaScript code.


2. The Preflight Request (The CORS Workflow)

Product-based APIs rarely use "simple" requests. Because you are sending JSON
(Content-Type: application/json) and JWTs (Authorization: Bearer...), the browser
considers the request "complex" or potentially dangerous.
Before it dares to send your actual POST or PUT request, it initiates the
Preflight Workflow.
Here is the exact step-by-step conversation between the browser and the server
during a Preflight:

1. The OPTIONS Request: The Browser asks for permission.
   Before sending your real request, the browser automatically
   sends an invisible OPTIONS request to the server. It asks: "Hey, I am at
   my-app.vercel.app. I want to send a PUT request with the Content-Type header.
   Are you okay with this?"

2. The Server’s Reply: The Server checks its VIP list.
   The backend server receives the OPTIONS request. It checks its CORS configuration.
   If allowed, it replies with a 200 OK (no body, just headers):
   Access-Control-Allow-Origin: https://my-app.vercel.app
   Access-Control-Allow-Methods: GET, POST, PUT
   Access-Control-Allow-Headers: Content-Type

3. The Real Request Executed: The actual data is sent.
   The browser reads the server’s reply. Since it got the green light, it finally sends the actual
   PUT request containing your JSON payload. If the server had rejected the OPTIONS request,
   the browser would immediately throw a CORS error without ever sending the PUT request.


Key insight: The browser enforces CORS, not the server. Even if a CORS error occurs, the server might have actually processed
the request—but the browser intercepts the response and refuses to hand it over to your JavaScript frontend.