MULTIPART REQUESTS & STREAMING RESPONSES

If you want to build a feature that lets a user upload a profile picture, you need Multipart Requests. If you want to build a
Netflix clone or an AI chatbot like me, you need Streaming Responses.
Let’s break them down and see how they bend the standard rules of HTTP.


1. Multipart Requests (Uploading Files)

Usually, when a frontend sends data to a backend via a POST request, it sends a neat little JSON object
(Content-Type: application/json).

The Problem: JSON is strictly for text. If you want to upload a 5MB image, you could convert the image into a giant
string of text (called Base64 encoding), but that makes the file size about 33% larger and forces the server to do a lot
of heavy lifting to decode it.

The Solution: We change the header to Content-Type: multipart/form-data.
This tells the server: “I am sending you a single HTTP request, but the body is chopped up into distinct, separate
compartments. Some compartments contain text, and some contain raw binary files.”

How it works under the hood (The Boundary)

To keep the compartments separate, the browser generates a random string of characters called a Boundary and uses
it as a divider.
Here is what the raw HTTP Request actually looks like:

POST /api/profile HTTP/1.1
Content-Type: multipart/form-data; boundary=----WebKitFormBoundaryXYZ123

------WebKitFormBoundaryXYZ123
Content-Disposition: form-data; name="username"

johndoe99

------WebKitFormBoundaryXYZ123
Content-Disposition: form-data; name="profile_picture"; filename="avatar.jpg"
Content-Type: image/jpeg

[...raw binary image data goes here...]

------WebKitFormBoundaryXYZ123--

Why Product Companies Care: In an interview, if they ask you to design an Instagram clone, you must specify that the photo
upload endpoint uses multipart/form-data. It allows the backend to stream the raw image file directly to a storage bucket
(like AWS S3) without crashing the server’s memory.


2. Streaming Responses (Chunked Data)

Normally, HTTP follows a strict “Bucket” model:
1. The server gathers all the data from the database.
2. It puts it all in one giant bucket (the HTTP Response).
3. It calculates the exact Content-Length.
4. It sends the bucket to the client.

The Problem: What if the user requests a 2GB movie file? Or what if they ask an AI a question, and the AI takes 10 seconds
to generate the full answer? The client would be staring at a loading spinner for an eternity waiting for the backend to fill up.

The Solution: The “Hose” model. We drop the Content-Length header entirely and replace it with Transfer-Encoding: chunked.
This tells the client: “I don’t know how big this file is going to be yet. I am going to keep this TCP connection open, and I will
send you the data in small chunks as soon as I have them ready.”


1. The Handshake:
   Status 200 OK.

   HTTP/1.1 200 OK
   Transfer-Encoding: chunked

   The server replies instantly with 200 OK and Transfer-Encoding: chunked. The browser knows to start listening.

2. Chunk 1 Arrives:
   Immediate display.

   5f
   [first chunk of data...]

   The server sends the first 5 seconds of the video (or the first 10 words of the AI’s answer).
   The browser instantly plays the video or renders the text on screen.

3. Continuous Streaming:
   Connection held open.

   4a
   [next chunk of data...]

   The server keeps sending chunks one by one. The browser keeps appending them to the screen.

4. The Final Chunk:
   Zero-length chunk.

   0

   When the movie is over or the AI is done typing, the server sends a special chunk with a length of 0. This tells the browser:
   “The stream is finished. You can close the connection.”


How to Answer in an Interview

If an interviewer asks: “How does an AI chatbot like ChatGPT send text to the screen word-by-word instead of waiting to show the whole paragraph?”

Your Answer

1. Identify the limitation: “Standard HTTP requests wait for the entire payload to be generated before sending the response, which causes high latency
   for AI generation.”

2. Provide the HTTP solution: “To solve this, the backend uses a streaming response. In standard HTTP, this is done by omitting the Content-Length
   header and using Transfer-Encoding: chunked.”

3. Explain the workflow: “The server holds the HTTP connection open and pushes down tiny chunks of data (tokens) as soon as the LLM generates them.
   The frontend receives these chunks asynchronously and appends them to the DOM in real-time. The stream ends when the server sends a zero-length chunk.

(Bonus SDE Flex: “Alternatively, you could use Server-Sent Events (SSE), which is an API built specifically for holding a one-way connection open to stream
text events from the server to the browser”).