API Keys (For Machines and Projects)

If a username and password identify a human user, an API Key identifies a machine or a project.
An API Key is a long, randomly generated string of characters (e.g., sk_live_9x8f7A...) given
to a developer. When you use Stripe to process payments or Twilio to send SMS messages, you don't "log in"
to their servers with a username and password in your code. You pass them your API Key. It acts as a permanent
VIP badge that tells their server exactly which company is making the request so they know who to bill.


The CS Reality (How it works under the hood)

Unlike a JWT (which carries a readable JSON payload inside it), an API key is
an Opaque Token. It contains no readable data. It is purely a database pointer.


1. Client Request

A third-party server sends an HTTP request
to your backend, attaching the key in
the headers (e.g., x-api-key: 123xyz).


2. API Gateway Interception

Before the request hits
your main Node.js logic,
an API Gateway
intercepts it.


3. Database Lookup

The Gateway queries a
high-speed database
(like Redis), searching
for that specific string.
It finds the key, identifies
it belongs to "Company A",
and checks if their billing
account is active.


4. Rate Limiting

The Gateway checks the
Token Bucket algorithm
to ensure Company A
hasn't exceeded their limit
of 100 requests per second.
If they pass, the request
is forwarded to your
application servers.


The Code (Node.js & Express)

Here is how product companies implement API key verification via middleware.


// The API Key Verification Middleware
const requireApiKey = async (req, res, next) => {
    // 1. Extract the key from the custom HTTP header
    const apiKey = req.header('x-api-key');

    if (!apiKey) return res.status(401).json({ error: "Missing API Key" });

    // 2. Validate against the database (usually Redis for speed)
    const clientRecord = await database.findClientByApiKey(apiKey);

    if (!clientRecord || !clientRecord.isActive) {
        return res.status(403).json({ error: "Invalid or revoked API Key" });
    }

    // 3. Attach the client info so the route knows who to bill
    req.apiClient = clientRecord;
    next();
};

// Protect the route
app.post('/api/v1/send-email', requireApiKey, (req, res) => {
    res.json({ message: "Email sent", billedTo: req.apiClient.companyName });
});


Pros, Cons, and Use Cases

Where we use it:
Server-to-Server (M2M/B2B) communication,
public developer APIs (Stripe, AWS, Google Maps),
and internal microservices.

Why we use it:
To track infrastructure usage, enforce rate limits,
and bill clients based on API consumption.

Pros:
Incredibly simple for developers to use.
Extremely easy to instantly revoke from the server
if a key is compromised.

Cons:
Stateful: Requires a database lookup on every single
request, which adds latency.
Insecure for Frontends: If embedded in a React app
or iOS app, anyone can still use DevTools and
see your quota.

API KEY AUTHENTICATION & INTERVIEW QUESTIONS


Q: What is API Key Authentication, and when should we use it over JWTs?

Your Answer:

“An API key is an opaque, static token used primarily for machine-to-machine authentication. It identifies the calling application or project rather than a specific end-user, making it ideal for metering usage, billing, and rate-limiting third-party developers. However, because API keys are long-lived and static, they should strictly be used in secure server-to-server flows. For frontend applications interacting with our backend, we should use short-lived, verifiable JWTs or Session cookies to prevent token theft.”


When to Use API Key vs JWT

Scenario                                      Use API Key        Use JWT

Machine-to-Machine (Server-to-Server)         ✓
Public Developer APIs (3rd party)             ✓
Frontend Web/Mobile App (End users)                              ✓
Identifying application/project               ✓
Identifying specific end-user                                     ✓
Billing / Rate Limiting                       ✓


SDE System Design Questions (What More Can Be Asked)

Product-based companies will immediately test your security awareness regarding API keys, because leaking one is a massive, expensive disaster.


1. The Transmission Trap

Q: Where should the client put the API key in their request?

The Trap:

Beginners often put it in the URL (e.g., GET /data?api_key=SECRET).

The SDE Answer:

“API keys must strictly be sent in HTTP Headers (like Authorization: Bearer or x-api-key). If sent in the URL query parameters, the plain-text key will be permanently written into the access logs of every intermediary router, load balancer, and proxy server (like Cloudflare or Nginx) on the internet, creating a massive security leak.”


2. The Storage Problem

Q: If our database is hacked, how do we ensure the hackers can’t use our customers’ API keys?

The SDE Answer:

“API keys must be treated exactly like passwords. Never store the plain-text key in our database, we only store a cryptographic hash (like SHA-256). Because we only have the hash, we must enforce a ‘Show Once’ UX – we show the raw key to the developer exactly one time upon creation. If they lose it, they must generate a new one.”


3. The Rotation Problem

Q: A developer accidentally pushed their API key to a public GitHub repo. How do we rotate their key without crashing their production servers that are currently using it?

The SDE Answer:

“We implement a Zero-Downtime Rotation protocol. We do not instantly delete the compromised