JWT (JSON Web Token) Authentication

If a Session ID is a VIP list at the door (the bouncer has to check the list in the database every time you enter), a JWT (JSON Web Token) is a cryptographically signed passport.
When you log in, the server gives you a passport. The server does not write your name down in a database. It doesn't remember you at all.
When you come back tomorrow, you hand the server your passport. The server checks the cryptographic signature on the passport,
says, “Yep, my secret stamp is on this.” and lets you in.
Because the server doesn't have to look you up in a database (like Redis), this is called Stateless Authentication.


The CS Reality (How a JWT is built)

A JWT is just a long text string separated by two dots: Header.Payload.Signature.

1. Header: Tells the server what algorithm was used to sign the token (usually HS256).

2. Payload: The actual JSON data you want to store (e.g., {"userId": 101, "role": "admin"}).
   Crucial rule: This data is Base64+ encoded, not encrypted. Anyone in the world can decode
   it and read your payload. Never put passwords here.

3. Signature: This is the magic. The server takes the Header, the Payload, and a Secret Key
   (that only the backend knows) and runs them through a hashing algorithm. If a hacker
   tries to change their role in the payload from "user" to "admin", the signature will instantly
   become invalid.


Structure of a JWT

Header
(Base64 encoded)
{
  "alg": "HS256"
}

Payload
(Base64 encoded)
{
  "userId": 101,
  "role": "admin"
}

Signature
HMAC/Hash
(using Secret Key)


1. The Token Storage Debate: LocalStorage vs. HttpOnly Cookies

The Question: “Where should the client store a JWT: in localStorage or an HttpOnly cookie? Defend your choice.”

What they are testing: Your understanding of browser security models, Cross-Site Scripting (XSS), and Cross-Site Request Forgery (CSRF).

How to Answer:

• Verdict: “Storing JWTs in an HttpOnly, Secure, SameSite=Strict cookie is far safer than localStorage.”

• The Technical Trade-off:
  - LocalStorage: Accessible via browser JavaScript (window.localStorage). If your application has a single XSS vulnerability
    (e.g., from an untrusted third-party npm package or unsanitized input), an attacker can execute a script to steal the JWT
    directly and exfiltrate it to an external server.
  - HttpOnly Cookie: This forbids client-side JavaScript from reading the cookie entirely, neutralizing token theft via XSS.
  - The Caveat: Using cookies opens up CSRF vulnerabilities, but CSRF can be defended against using modern SameSite=Lax/Strict
    attributes and Anti-CSRF double-submit cookies. Theoretically, storing the token as a cookie means no client-side defense if
    malicious script execution occurs.


Storage Comparison

LocalStorage
• Accessible via JavaScript
• Vulnerable to XSS
• Easy for attacker to steal JWT

HttpOnly Cookie
• Not accessible via JavaScript
• Protects against XSS
• Vulnerable to CSRF
• Use Secure, SameSite=Strict


2. Symmetric (HS256) vs. Asymmetric (RS256) in Microservices

The Question: “In a microservices architecture with 10 different internal services, should we sign JWTs using HS256 or RS256?”

What they are testing: Public-key cryptography and whether you understand key distribution risks across services.

How to Answer:

• Verdict: “You should use an asymmetric algorithm like RS256 (RSA Signature with SHA-256) or ES256 (ECDSA).”

• The Technical Justification:
  - HS256 (Symmetric): Uses a single shared secret key for both signing and verifying the token. To verify user tokens, every
    single one of your 10 microservices must possess this secret key. If a developer misconfigures or leaks the secret in service #10,
    an attacker can now forge tokens for the entire ecosystem.
  - RS256 (Asymmetric): Uses a Private/Public key pair. The central Authentication Service keeps the Private Key hidden and is
    the only service capable of minting tokens. All other microservices are given the Public Key. They can mathematically verify that
    incoming tokens are legitimate without ever having the ability to forge new ones.


Key Distribution

HS256 (Symmetric)

Same Secret Key

Service 1 ... Service 10

• All services have the secret key
• If leaked, attacker can forge tokens


RS256 (Asymmetric)

Auth Service

Private Key
        ↓
Service 1 ... Service 10

Public Key

• Only Auth Service has private key
• Other services verify using public key


3. The "alg: none" Vulnerability

The Question: “Explain the classic alg: 'none' attack on JWT verification libraries.”

What they are testing: Your knowledge of implementation flaws and defensive coding in authentication libraries.

How to Answer:

• The Exploit: The JWT specification technically permits an algorithm value of none (used for unsecured tokens when signing
  is skipped). Early versions of several JWT libraries blindly trusted the alg header specified in the incoming token. An attacker
  could take a valid token, change their payload to {"role": "admin"}, set the header to {"alg": "none"}, remove the signature
  completely, and send the request. Vulnerable libraries would see alg: none and validate the token as legitimate without
  checking any signature.

• The Prevention: “Modern implementations must strictly enforce expected algorithms on the server. The verification function
  should never trust the algorithm claimed in the token header; instead, the backend should specify an explicit whitelist.”


4. Immediate Token Revocation & The Blacklist Pattern

The Question: “A user changes their password or reports their account hacked. Since JWTs are stateless and cannot be edited by the server,
how do you immediately invalidate active tokens?”

What they are testing: Your ability to handle the biggest architectural trade-off of stateless auth without defeating the purpose of using JWTs.

How to Answer:

• The Approaches:
  1. Redis Blacklist (Token Denylist): When a user logs out or resets a password, the server extracts the token's unique identifier (jti - JWT ID)
     and its remaining time-to-live (ttl), storing it in a fast Redis cache. On subsequent requests, the server checks if the incoming jti
     exists in the blacklist. The key automatically evicts from Redis once the token naturally expires.

  2. token_version / Timestamp check: The user's database record contains a password_changed_at timestamp or an integer token_version.
     The JWT payload carries an iat (issued-at) timestamp or token_version. If iat < password_changed_at, the token is rejected.

• The Trade-off: “A Redis blacklist reintroduces a cache lookup on every request, partially eroding the stateless advantage of JWTs. Therefore,
  keeping JWT lifespans very short (5-15 minutes) is the first line of defense to limit the blast radius of unrevoked tokens.”


Blacklist Approach

Extract jti
from token
        ↓
Store jti in Redis
(with TTL)
        ↓
Check jti on
every request


token_version Approach

Compare iat / token_version
with user's record

• If iat < password_changed_at
  → reject token


5. Refresh Token Rotation & Reuse Detection

The Question: “How does Refresh Token rotation work, and how does it detect token theft?”

What they are testing: Industry-standard OAuth 2.0 / secure session rotation flows.

How to Answer:

• The Mechanics:
  1. When an Access Token (15-min lifespan) expires, the client sends its single-use Refresh Token (stored securely) to the /auth/refresh endpoint.
  2. The server invalidates that specific Refresh Token, issues a new Access Token, and issues a new Refresh Token back to the client.
  3. Reuse Detection: If an attacker intercepts a Refresh Token and uses it before the legitimate user does, the server recognizes that an already-invalidated Refresh Token was submitted. This triggers an immediate security alert: the server assumes the token family is compromised and automatically invalidates all active tokens (both the attacker's and the user's), forcing a re-authentication via password.


Refresh Token Rotation

1. Client sends
   Refresh Token
   (single-use)
        ↓
2. Server invalidates
   old Refresh Token
   and issues new
   Access + Refresh Token


Reuse Detection

If old token is reused:
→ invalidate entire token family
→ force re-authentication


6. Network Overhead & Payload Bloat

The Question: “Why wouldn't we just pack all user permissions, user profile data, and organization settings into the JWT payload so the backend never has to query the database?”

What they are testing: Understanding the network transport layer (HTTP headers) and performance bottlenecks.

How to Answer:

• The Constraint: JWTs are transmitted on every single HTTP request—usually within the Authorization: Bearer <token> header or as a Cookie.
  Because the payload is Base64URL-encoded (which increases raw data size by roughly 33%), bloating the payload creates massive network overhead.
  For instance, a 4KB JWT on an application handling 10,000 requests per second consumes 40MB/s of extra network bandwidth just in headers.
  Furthermore, many web servers (like Nginx, Apache) have a default maximum header size limit (typically 8KB to 16KB); exceeding this will cause
  requests to fail with a 431 Request Header Fields Too Large error.

• Best Practice: “Keep JWT payloads minimal: only store the subject identifier (sub), essential role/scope claims, and standard expiry timestamps (exp, iat).