SESSION-BASED AUTHENTICATION

By default, the HTTP protocol is stateless. This means every time you click a link or refresh a page, the server
completely forgets who you are. It treats every single request as if it is coming from a total stranger.
To keep a user logged in, we have to cheat the system. We use Session-Based Authentication.
When a user logs in, the backend creates a VIP pass (a Session ID) and forces the browser to carry that pass.
Every time the browser makes a new request, it flashes the VIP pass at the server, proving they are already
authenticated.


1. The CS Reality (How it works under the hood)

Session authentication is a Stateful architecture. This means the server has to actively allocate memory
to remember the user.
Here is the exact step-by-step cryptographic and network flow:


1. The Login Request (Client → Server)

The user submits their email and password via a POST /login request.
The backend hashes the password and verifies it against the database.


2. Session Creation (Server Memory Allocation)

The server creates a record in its memory (or a fast database
like Redis). It generates a long, cryptographically random,
unique string called a Session ID (e.g., s_7x9f2A...).
It maps this ID to the user's database ID.


Server Memory / Redis

Session ID        User ID
s_7x9f2A...       123

Store in memory
(or Redis)


3. The Set-Cookie Header (Server → Client)

The server sends an HTTP 200 OK response. Critically, it
attaches a header: Set-Cookie: session_id=s_7x9f2A...

HTTP/1.1 200 OK
Set-Cookie: session_id=s_7x9f2A...
(Response Body)


4. The Browser Stores It (Browser automation)

The browser sees the Set-Cookie header and automatically
saves that string to the user's hard drive. The frontend
JavaScript developer doesn't have to write any code to do this.

Browser Storage (Cookies)

Automatically save
session_id=s_7x9f2A...
to hard drive


5. Subsequent Requests (Client → Server)

The user clicks “View Dashboard”. The browser automatically
attaches Cookie: session_id=s_7x9f2A... to the new HTTP request.
The backend reads the cookie, looks up that string in Redis,
finds the corresponding User ID, and allows access.

GET /dashboard
Cookie: session_id=s_7x9f2A...

Lookup session_id
→ get User ID
→ allow access

s_7x9f2A... → 123


The Problem with Multiple Servers (Load Balancing)

If Amazon uses standard sessions, User A logs in, and Server 1 saves their Session ID in their local RAM.
Ten seconds later, User A adds an item to their cart. Amazon has 5,000 servers, so the Load Balancer routes
this new request to Server 2 to balance the traffic.
Server 2 looks at the user's cookie, checks its own local RAM, and says: “I have no idea who you are.”
The user is suddenly logged out.


User A
(Browser)

        |
        | 1. Login
        | (session_id=s_7x9f2A...)
        ↓

Load Balancer

       ↙              ↘

Server 1              Server 2
(local RAM)           (local RAM)

Session ID            Session ID
s_7x9f2A...            (empty)

User ID
123

✓ User A logged in      ✗ “I have no idea
                         who you are.”
                         → User logged out


The Solution

You must extract the session storage out of the individual servers' RAM and put it into a centralized, lightning-fast,
in-memory database like Redis. This way, whether the load balancer sends the user to Server 1, Server 2, or Server 5000,
all servers check the same centralized Redis cache to validate the Session ID.